Red: Compiling Haskell to Reduceron

The idea for this project came out of my research in the fall, when I learned about the Reduceron project.  The Reduceron is an experimental computer architecture and accompanying low-level language that can run code written in a pure functional programming language natively.  Traditionally, functional programs are executed on modern hardware via a translation to standard machine-level programming languages (x86, ARM, etc.), but while this method does produce executable programs, it means that functional programs suffer overhead in the form of CPU and memory usage only required because of the incompatibilites of the imperative and functional programming styles.  The Reduceron, then, offers a "functional" assembly language as a target for compilation of functional programs, eliminating the overhead incurred by the awkward translation.

Currently, the only way to generate Reduceron-executable code is via the F-lite compiler.  F-lite is a minimal lazy functional language that supports standard functional constructs such as lambdas, algebraic data types, pattern matching, etc.  The F-lite compiler performs necessary transformations required by the Reduceron specification over the source code and generates executable Reduceron code.  However, the F-lite compiler exists mostly as a proof of concept and therefore does not contain any of the standard libraries used by practical functional programmers.  In order for the Reduceron to become a viable architecture, there must be a way to compile arbitrary source code to it.

The programming language used by most people looking for a non-strict, pure functional language is Haskell.  While there are several implementations of the Haskell specification, the most widely used compiler is the Glasgow Haskell Compiler (GHC).  My goal is to write a new backend for GHC so that Haskell can be compiled directly to Reduceron.  I believe that such a compiler will greatly facilitate further research into the field of functional programming languages and their implementations.